Even though I'm a little stuff stuff and so on, there's usually more trouble in turning
the tape.
Okay, we got the tape rolling.
Could you first of all just say a little bit about your first exposure to science fiction
back when you were a teenager?
Oh way back, even pre-teenage.
I'd say probably grammar school.
I was a very fast reader, very advanced reader.
And I was reading both classical stuff and the stuff in the libraries, so on from third
and fourth grade.
I very much remember reading Wells and Burt and shocking teachers by turning in book
reports on them in elementary school.
Probably the most formative influence, which is sadly no longer around nor is there any
equivalent.
It was done by Winston, which was a series of science fiction books oriented towards
teens, mostly written by Lechardel Ray, Don Wilheim and Evan Hunter under a lot of pseudonyms.
And it was really a superior series and it really got you excited looking at more.
Oh, okay, thank you.
How did you get involved in the fan structure?
Actually, I saw a letter in a science fiction magazine.
I was pretty poor as a kid, but we did have a drugstore across the street with a corner
newsstand and so on.
So in order to get away with as much as possible, you know, we'd go over there and I'd go to
read some of the stuff out of the magazines at the drugstore newsstand.
And since I was good friends with the pharmacist's son, he was more tolerant towards me.
And I saw this letter and this guy was talking about he had an amateur magazine or a fan
zine down in Alabama.
And I thought that was great.
So I wrote and suddenly discovered that I was part of an institution called Science Fiction
Fandom that had been around since the 30s at least and was extremely large international
in scope.
And this would be about when I was 12 years old.
And I've been sort of more or less involved in it ever since.
It became pretty obvious to me after getting into it for a while that if I was going to
afford it, I was going to have to do something to make money in it because they had conventions,
various parts of the country which took money.
And the best contact was by getting a mimeograph of your own and producing your own little
magazine.
And that takes money and I didn't have any of it.
Is that how the, well how did you start the mirage then, the fan zine?
Well, that basically was the reason we started with the fan zine which was run off actually
at a school at the beginning because we didn't have anything else.
And it got some reasonably good reactions.
So I started building up from there while I was doing that actually.
I had correspondence already with enormous numbers of people, both professional and fan.
I had so much correspondence I can't believe how much, how many people I was contacting
on a regular basis.
And so I started tapping them and created the fan zine mirage in addition of a $40 surplus
mimeograph found in an old store which I still own by the way and which still works.
I was able to start putting out a fan zine called Mirage and for the next 10 years that
was the sort of the bedrock of my contact with everybody else.
And I discovered very quickly that you could make at least a little bit of money out of
it.
So that got the idea of why not doing side booklets.
I was serious and constructive at the same time that everybody else was being just sort
of kid hobbyist.
I really had a magazine that discussed the literature, discussed the writers and so on
fast and present.
And at a time when very few of these were coming out.
And so I attracted a rather large audience of collectors and professional writers and
artists and so on.
And I was able to create out of that the Mirage press which started off again as mimeographed
publications and then later grew as capital grew into a hardcover and paperback and quality
paperback publishing.
And if I understand it those books are mostly nonfiction studies of bibliographies and authors
and so forth?
You can't compete with double day.
I mean let's face it.
You can't compete with double day, so I'm going to choose to turn so on for the good
stuff in fiction.
And although I did do a little bit of fiction, getting into prints and books of work that
I thought was very very neglected, you really have to promote fiction.
Whereas nonfiction and reference material is always, there's always a heavy market and
there's been a growing market for it.
And so I concentrated in that end.
And we came up with some rather successful books, Guide to Middle Earth, which in its
Valentine form, which I still own a piece of, is still selling well in Atlas of Fantasy.
We did three books on sword and sorcery fiction before the comic books discovered Conan.
We did essays, we did critical studies, Jack Williamson for example on H.G. Well, that
kind of thing.
And occasionally we did rather odd materials such as a collection of all of the Ferdinand
fecute, bad puns that have been published over the years, this kind of thing.
Mostly though we were serious reference works and we still have a number of them that are
standard.
Now how did you publish those books?
What did you design them and got the material and so forth and sent them to a job or some
kind of guy, I don't know, a publisher?
Well no, I was the publisher.
As I say, I started off with a bibliography of H.P. Lovecraft, which I did myself.
Put it together, mimeographed it with the help of August Arilith, who owned the rights
to the H.P. Lovecraft material at the time and sold it for what in 1960 was the horrendous
fee of a one dollar and we sold a hundred of them.
And I was floored to cost me about forty dollars to produce it.
And then the late David H. Keller, who was an old time science fiction and fantasy writer,
said, I have this one novel that's never been published, would you be interested in it?
So I did a edition of that also in the mimeograph, illustrated in signed edition though.
We did only a hundred and seventy-five of them.
We sold it to two dollars and it went.
And we did five or six mimeographed items and had an increasing complexity in size and
they succeeded extremely well.
The only thing that stopped me from going further right at the beginning was of course
I didn't have any money.
And therefore it became a scramble to find various partners and so on who had money.
And once I got capital from them, I was able to get projects that were floating around,
good ideas, sometimes I originated the idea.
In the case of Guide to Middle Earth, it was simply a case of seeing this enormous concordance
to JRW Tolkien published in multiple parts in a fanzine with a circulation of a few hundred
and saying, you know, that would make a really successful book, Tolkien's About the Hit.
And so I wrote him and I suggested that we do the book.
Once we had some capital, we had a typesetter and other stuff.
So we designed the book and typeset the book, got the cover, put everything together and
then we went to Ann Arbor, Michigan to have it printed and found because that's the short
run book capital of the nation.
It was wall to wall.
Book publishers, they're all specializing in smaller runs.
And we used our contacts with people, with other publishers who had been doing special
publishing for years.
And we went out there and made a good deal, established our credit and we had a string
of very large successes.
Okay, good. Let me go ahead and ask you when and why you decided to become a writer.
Yeah, that's a little more complicated. I started, I'd always known I was going to be
a writer. I mean, there just was never any question in my mind.
But it was just sort of something that you never really sat down and did.
I used to play around with stories here and there.
John Campbell was a big help. During the 60s, I would float ideas and fragments off him
and he would be very, very nice and tell me exactly what was wrong.
Of course, what I've created everybody about John Campbell was that the man had been editing
for 40 years and he could put his finger on something and tell you exactly what you were
doing wrong.
And it was terribly infuriating to discover that he was right in almost every case.
He saw why he did it from 39 until he died.
And as a result of being able to have the help of people like Campbell and August Arilith
and a lot of really established writers and editors in the field, I was able to get a good
recognition of exactly what was required in the field.
It just was a matter of sitting down and doing it.
And what provided the kick was that in 1975, I had all sorts of things go wrong at the
same time.
I was having job problems I was teaching and there was sort of a constant war there.
I had just had a romance break up and my partner in extreme source of capital in Maraj
Press had had a mental breakdown at the institutionalized which left me without capital and with a lot
of debts.
And everything just looked downhill.
On top of that, I had to have a operation on the roof of my mouth that had not been
successful.
The infection that was there would have killed me.
And so I'm thinking, oh my God, I could be dead.
So if I'm going to write it all, I better do it.
So I sat on a typewriter and there was really no question in my mind as to what I'd do
first.
I had been playing around with an idea for years and years and years.
There was even a short fancy version of it, 20 years old, called Jungle or Jungle of Stars.
There were a lot of code words for Jungle was always in it.
And I sat down and wrote the things.
I had been around so long in my mind and discussions and so on that there was just no problems,
no resistance, no having to think it out or anything else.
And I wrote it solidly in about two and a half, three weeks.
And then sent it off.
And it's a good old fashioned type.
It's a science fiction murder mystery.
Very much at home in the old founding analog.
So on even though that's some modern touches to it.
And Judy Lindell Ray, who had just become editor of Valentine, which was soon to have
a science fiction line named after her, took a look at it.
We'd known each other for about 15 years.
And she put off reading it for quite a long time because she was afraid that if it was
terrible and she said so that she'd blow our friendship or something.
Finally she said, we got together at a convention and she admitted to me all this.
She said, okay, I'll read it, but be prepared.
And about four days later I get a phone call and she said, hey, this is great.
I want to buy it.
And that was the first sale.
The money there paid off a lot of medical bills and so on.
And also since I had sold it, it made me feel a little better, a little more confident.
Oddly enough, I didn't really immediately turn around and start writing anything else.
I tried to take care of a whole lot of stuff.
And it wasn't until the next summer that I was actually able to sit down and think,
see what do I want to do next.
Okay, yeah, that's good.
I want to talk just a little bit about the well.
We don't have time to talk about all your books.
I read them, but I wanted to specify or focus on a couple things.
One thing that fascinates me about all your books is your dedications.
I learned just as much from reading those, I think, as I do reading the books.
And one of the things that fascinated me in particular was the, I think it was a dedication
to Twilight, the Well of Souls, where you talked about the origin of the well world idea
at this National Park in Washington.
That's right.
Could you expand on that?
Okay, well that just sort of leads into where I was, where I just broke off.
I've had a habit of, every year since I have been employed and been making money
and been reasonably successful, to turn and go someplace every year in the summertime
that I haven't been before.
I sometimes go back to play favorite places as well, but I always like to put at least one place in.
And in 1974, I'd gone up to Alaska and trooped around the state for four to six weeks.
And I had to go through Washington State to get there, of course.
And I looked around and I said, gee, this is real pretty, but I've never really had time to stay
in the state of Washington.
So I made it a point that the next time I could, I was going to come back and just spend time
doing nothing but exploring Washington State.
And in 1976, I did.
I went up there and just rented a car and my general technique is to point it in any direction
and just simply cover the area, get lost, and then get unlawful again,
poke into everything that can be done.
Lots of national parks.
I was a big fan of a national park system.
And I am also delighted with the state of Washington because I have a passion for the
channels of ferry boats and a state with 22 ferry boats.
And I had gone actually into the middle of the state mostly to take a ferry boat across Lake Roosevelt.
And I'm looking at the map after taking the ferry across.
And I see this long lake that I've never really heard of before called Lake Chalant.
And so I went up to it.
I originally thought it was a damned lake, but it turned out to be not an artificial thing at all.
It turned out to be a 55-mile long, one-mile wide glacial lake, natural lake with a big powerhouse.
They put a turbine on it at the end and a town supporting it, Chalant.
And I saw that there was a passenger ferry that went up, no roads.
So the next day I caught the ferry, the lady of the lake, which is a mail boat,
drops people off, run ladders up a surpliff, gets people off and on,
and finally winds up 55 miles up Lake in the village of Taheacon.
Taheacon is an old logging town.
They used to cut logs up there and dump them in the lake and they'd float down to Chalant.
It's now the National Park Service headquarters for the National Recreation Area there
and North Cascades National Park in a small lodge.
So I was able to get a room there and I discovered that when that boat turns around at 12.45 in the afternoon,
there is no way out.
You are at the most isolated. I think I had already been all over Alaska and this was the most isolated I ever felt.
You're surrounded by sheer mountains on three sides, the lake on the fourth.
You can turn on a radio and you just can't get anything.
There's combination of mountains and geography and so on, just block it all out.
It's just totally isolated. There's no roads. There's no telephone or telegraph wires or anything.
And I got to sitting by the lake that night and talking with some people.
And I got the idea for this large world built by a long dead race and so on.
I didn't really have much of an idea of what it was and they do have a service out of Stahika that will take you up to Trailhead.
And so I went up to Trailhead and I wound up walking down.
I'm a great hiker as long as the direction is down.
I'm afraid I've never been to the bottom of the Grand Canyon because I can get down there but I can't get back up.
But here was a trail that Taylor made for me. It was down the Cascades all the way.
So I took it and it took about 8 and a half hours to walk the whole distance.
And during that time you go through 8 climate zones. You start off in the snow, you wind up in a rainforest.
And some of the changes are rather abrupt. You just go around to switch back and it just changes from one climate to another.
Each with its own different plants and insects and occasional mammals. Even the birds seem to be different.
But yeah, this is how that big world would be like.
So even though while I was on my way down I was kind of scribbling ideas.
And I got the idea for this giant world composed of basically world-plates.
Different abrupt geography, climate, landforms, you name it, each with its own dominant race.
By the time I hit bottom my head had pretty well worked out although I didn't really know what the shape of the things were going to be.
I wish I could take credit for just going to a game board but it didn't occur to me until I had gotten back home.
And I was discussing the idea with a science fiction fan named Ben Yellow, son of a Nobel winner, Rosalind Yellen.
And he said, why don't you just use an Abilion Hill game board?
And I thought, yeah, that would work.
So we got out an Abilion Hill map, a war game map and a little trusty calculator.
We laid a grid of these hexagons around a roughly earth-sized world.
Of course you cannot cover a sphere with hexagons, so that means we had the north zone and the south zone, which would be the embassy's entry and exit point.
That would cover our sphere.
And then it was just simply a matter of sitting down, listing what was required to do, what kind of creatures and land, climate and so on.
And I would have to do for the route of the story, dropping by Abilion Hill, which I lived very near at the time, picking up some blank maps and just working it out from there.
How many books did you entand when you started?
One.
Midnight stands alone.
As a matter of fact, if I had thought that I was going to write any more in the series, I would have done a few things differently in midnight because no end of problem is later.
Because it was very nice when you were just, you know, if you needed an impassable hex for a particular plot problem, you just simply stuck one there.
And if you needed one with a different level of technology, you simply stuck it there for plot purposes.
But when you had to expand the map and when you had to make it a much wider, more panoramic type of thing, I discovered that some of the early sins that I had committed for expediency in midnight
caused me no end of map problems when I went from, say, six or eight hexes going this way to thousands or even hundreds going out from it.
The thing is that midnight was the book that made me.
I took it, I was proofreading it at the World Science Fiction Convention in 1976.
And Judy Lindell Ray came up and said, when are you going to do your next book?
And I just couldn't resist it. It wasn't completely proofread or anything yet.
I just picked it up in the hands of a tour and said, here.
And she took it home and four days after I got home, I got a call from her saying it's terrific.
It's better than the first real writer, you know, the whole flattery bet.
And she bought that and then she proceeded to schedule it in what was not a very nice play.
Basically, it was the non-leader. The leader book, of course, is the one that gets all the money and all the promotion for any given month.
It was not a leader because that's usually determined by how much money is paid.
It was brought out in July, which is one of the worst book-buying months of the year.
People are on vacation, colleges are out, you name it, you know.
And with no fanfare, it never did get one major review in the science fiction media at all.
And so it was just sort of dropped there.
But something caught, and I wish I knew exactly what was done accidentally so that I could do it again on purpose.
Because particularly when the college had started opening up again in September, the sales of the thing just sort of started going through the roof.
And I discovered when I tried to get a couple of extra copies for people, in early October I called up Valentine and they said,
I'm sorry, it's out of print. I said, what do you mean it's out of print? What did you do? Print 25,000?
No, they hadn't. They'd done a full major print run and they'd sold out of it.
It turned out that for reasons that even they were shocked at, and nobody's been able to quite figure out yet how the word got around,
the book became the biggest selling non-media title they had.
I mean, they did have Star Wars, you know.
But beyond that, beyond the media stuff, I was the biggest seller of the year.
And that's, you know, one of the ways to get big fast and get your career cemented is to come in from the movies or be some kind of personality or something
and come in and get promoted right from the beginning.
Or have a movie made of your first book so that your second book gets really big, just, you know, West Even King did a second thing.
A way that gets equal attention and respect is a book that is literally dropped in as just a make-do book, a book that never is expected to go anywhere.
They don't put any money into it. They don't put any promotion. They hardly even send out review copies.
The thing becomes a big hit anyway. That impresses me.
And so it was really midnight that made my career.
Yeah, that's interesting. Okay.
Where in the whole scheme of the books, the whole five novel set, where did the Markovians go wrong?
Oh, well. I have this one problem with them, with discussing specific things.
And that is the fact that really the question of where the Markovians went wrong, that was the after-race, of course, that's dope to think.
It's something that's really speculated on, but you never really know.
I like to give the reader some kind of feeling. I like to let sort of the books speak for themselves on those problems.
I keep running into all sorts of things as to whether or not Nathan Brazile, who is the hero of Three Out of the Five, is, is or is not God.
And he alternately claims to be and alternately shoots himself down, but he lies a lot.
So nobody's really quite sure. He gives several different things and it's left up to the reader to decide.
I think some of those questions are best left undecided.
Of course, the Markovians, the foundation of the Markovians thing is the same.
I use this thing in a number of other books. Is that utopia is unremittingly boring.
That there is no such thing as a perfect society. And that the thing that we do is we strive to create a perfect society.
And that, that is a good thing. And that produces, in many cases, a lot of good results.
But if we, if we ever attained this thing, I mean, we'd be nothing but human beings.
As far as happiness is concerned, I mean, we can give everybody an lobotomy and they'll run around being very happy.
But they're not human anymore, I don't think.
In order to keep our creative spark or outward urges, our excitement and everything else, there can be no such thing as perfection attained.
And this is exactly what the Markovians tried for. They tried for perfection attained and they attained it.
They got to the point where they were gone, literally, where their devices could conjure up anything they wanted, just with a mere thought of it.
I since had it pointed out to me that they're sort of like the, the Krell in the old movie Forbidden Planet, in that they reached this Godhead status.
But the Krell experiment failed because they couldn't control their, their passions.
And the Markovian experiments exceeded and they literally became gods, then they became miserable.
There was nothing left to attain, nothing left to know, nothing left, you know, you had a bunch of, a bunch of preachers that spent millions of years rising to this point.
And they sit around and they say, this one there is.
So, the idea of the great experiment came about was to redo it, to literally start the Markovians over from scratch with different kinds of creatures, different environments, with no real value system.
I mean, they have to develop their own unique value systems. They do.
And as a result, they're, they're grown and they're tested on this laboratory world, the well world.
And then they were the ones that worked, the ones that showed promise of survival were then set into motion out throughout the universe, including men.
And they had the hopes that eventually one of these races would reach a state of perfection that would not be empty or hollow.
Now, I personally believe that, that when you reach that state, it is empty and hollow.
But that's just my feeling other people might certainly do think differently.
Okay, that's exactly the way I read it. And that was, that was what I would have said myself if I were asked on it.
The, the incredible variety of, of alien types you have in well world.
I'm always interested in how a science fiction author thinks up his aliens. Do you have any special ways that you go about that?
No, I've created.
Particularly, I used a variety of things. In some cases, a good pictorial natural history text will give you more weird creatures than you've ever seen, which can be modified.
Some came out of mythology. Some came more or less direct out of Fantasia, sorts of like that.
And a few came out of comic book concepts and, you know, just, you just brought them in from all over and you used basic shapes and basic types.
And then you adjust them to what would happen if these were real, convenient, intelligent creatures.
You know, creatures. I found very, very little trouble in coming up with an enormous variety of them.
I'm not sure whether I could come up with 1,560, which is the number I would have to to visit every hex in the well world.
But I've had no trouble coming up with the 200 or 300 so far.
Okay, the, in regard to the well world and not, not only the well world, but even in the, say, the web of the chosen and jungle of stars,
I've noticed almost a chock or motif, I'd call it, of transformation.
You know, where humans are transformed or creatures are transformed. Is that, is that just coincidental or do you, do you have...
In some books it's coincidental, in some books it's not. In some books it's even cynical in the sense that it's a fun thing to do.
It's a fun thing to deal with.
We have, for example, in the well world basically a, a wizard of Oz motif, you know, where you're able to, you're taken out of this very unpleasant society
and you're suddenly given a new chance in this new and colorful world as something else.
And of course the appeal of it, I realized later to the reader is that they can imagine themselves as almost anything in that setting.
In terms of transformation generally, it is, it is a fun type thing to deal with.
It is something where you can make statements, for example, you know, which is more important, form or substance.
You can delve into some pretty deep things with it, but at the same time it has a great deal of variety.
As I said, great many things that you can do with it and it seems to strike a chord in a lot of other people.
So I use it a fair amount. I don't use it exclusively.
I've written a World War II novel, I've written a futuristic political thriller where nobody gets changed at anything.
And there are even some science fiction novels in line where really nobody gets transformed.
I think people start looking. I think I can examine almost any outer space motif and give you something where people can say, hey, they changed from this to this.
In the case of Jungle, nobody really changes, I mean, which you've got a parasite.
There's no real transformation there.
That's an old tried and true thing where you've got the parasitic creature in happening, whose body you don't know.
And I don't consider that a transformation book at all.
In case of Webber that chose, and that was my least favorite book of the ones that I have done, there are several reasons for that.
One of which is that most people do not see it as the burlesque it was intended.
Number two, after all the hullabaloo over midnight, they didn't review midnight at all, but everybody reviewed Webber the Chose.
And everybody looked at Webber the Chose, all the big shot reviewers, and not a single one of them saw anything odd or unusual or even funny
about creatures who take over worlds by crapping on their lawns.
And instead they reviewed this as a serious sober political novel and so on, and totally missed the point,
and they decided that I was just an incompetent hack because I, you know, they've done this with midnight.
I could have taken the comparison to a lot of other novels.
They've done it with a number of my serious books, but they didn't. They did it with this one.
And I was very, very disappointed to discover that most people didn't realize that Webber the Chose was a burlesque of science fiction clichés,
including me, including my own, but basically 40s and 50s clichés.
And it's apparently very few people who really understood that until I point out how absurd some of the premises are in an old book.
Oh yeah, gee, that's funny.
You know, I started with the idea of an alien mastermind sitting in orbit trying to remember the pot of the B picture to take over the world right.
And going on from there.
I mean, I don't write one kind of book. I write lots of different kinds of books.
I write bitterly satirical books. I write funny, turical books. And I write serious novels.
And I like to let the novels speak for themselves, but I'm discovering that much of my audience has no sense of humor in what I hit them with a pie in the face on page 150.
I think most people, I had the opposite problem with a book called In The Devil Will Drag You Under, where it was very clear, very close to the start, that this was going to be a funny book, a lipstick sort of book.
And there are some very serious things addressed in The Devil Will Drag You Under.
And there are some very serious scenes in it. And I've never seen anyone notice these, because they're so having so much fun back with Burlesque.
But, you know, what can you do?
Well, you mentioned another book too a few moments ago. You mentioned a serious political thrill. I assume that's War of Shadows.
Yeah, War of Shadows.
Futuristic thrill, you said. I'm sorry.
Yeah, which is the only, War of Shadows is the only books of mine that's likely to become a movie at some point.
That's what I wondered about. I wondered how it sold, and it seemed to me to be an obvious kind of a movie book. What are the possibilities?
Well, terribly, because it was badly mis-marketed. It was sold as a far out science fiction thing. It was sold as a sort of a paperback version of an analog.
It was badly packaged, badly distributed, badly promoted, and it didn't sell all that well, but it did sell as a movie.
That would make an excellent movie. I hope somebody picks it up.
Well, somebody picked it up. I mean, I'm getting paid every year on rights for it, and he's still talking about doing it, and they've got a script now.
But a lot of things get optioned to movies, so we'll wait and see.
I could have optioned a couple of other things, but I didn't like the deals.
For example, Film Nation wanted to buy the well world, and I discovered very quickly that what they really wanted to do was to keep them being sued
while they played around with the gimmick for a Saturday morning TV cartoon series.
So I turned them down.
There's some hope that the British are very, very interested in doing it as a radio serial. I'd love to see that.
I hope that comes off, but the negotiations are out of my year.
Yeah, okay. Let me move along for a few minutes to the one you're working on now. I assume you're still working on it, the Four Lords of the Diamond.
Yeah, I've done three. I have the fourth one to do.
Unlike the Well Books, this is really a single novel in four volumes.
It's just the kind of idea that you must do that way.
Otherwise, you have the world's largest book, and it has to be priced terribly, and nobody will buy it.
Four Lords is there for several reasons.
Number one, of course, the real problem that you have when you have a successful series like The Well
is the same problem that, say, George Reeve's had as Superman. You get terribly tight cash.
Not only that, everybody wants you to play Superman, you know, and don't want to play anything else.
And if you're serious about your career, you've got to do other things.
And so they kept coming after me to do Well Book after Well Book, and I said, wait a minute.
I've got to stop and not do any Well Books for a while. Quite a while.
And I've got to do other things. I've got to reestablish the fact that I am a serious novelist,
and I'm not going to sell out like this, or else I'm never going to be able to write the things I want to write.
It's very seductive because the money's very good.
But of course, I've also been one of those people that's been terribly disappointed reading the fourth volume
in a good three volume series. The more you do, if the books are not up to the previous books,
they're even more of a disappointment.
So I sat down and said, OK, they want another series. Let's do this one.
This has originally been outlined as a single novel, but it was pretty obvious that it couldn't be done as a single novel.
Just simply for size and cost.
And it has a tremendous number of the elements that I have become known for.
It has a lot of new material as well. It has a lot of political commentary.
It has a lot of social commentary in it.
It has also slam bang angst, action, Machiavellian intrigue, and everything else,
because nobody's going to read your message if you don't entertain first.
And these are four worlds in one system that are basically a prison planet series.
And you get dropped on there.
And the foundation idea, which appeals to me an awful lot, is that alien race discovers us before we discover them,
decides that it can't win a war against us.
Maybe they're just not as many of them, or there's technological problems or something like that.
So they study us and study us, and they discover that as in all human societies, there is this massive criminal syndicate.
And that these criminal syndicate leaders are mostly imprisoned for life on the four lords of the diamond, the Wharton diamond.
These four worlds.
So what the aliens do is they contact these bitter super crux, and they take out a contract on human civilization.
They provide the technology and the four lords, the four syndicate chiefs,
provide the expertise, know-how, and so on to bring down the government and maybe the social system.
Maybe everything of human civilization.
The reward that they're offered is that the four worlds have a biological trap.
You die if you ever leave, and the aliens seem to have a way around this.
And so the ultimate reward would be if you destroy human civilization, you not only get your revenge,
but then you get to get off the planet and pick up the pieces and become the bosses yourself.
So it becomes a big deal.
And the idea is, is they've got to go into this Wharton diamond, and anybody they send in is going to get this disease
and it's going to be stuck there the same way, which means they're going to have problems with their loyalties.
And you keep somebody loyal.
And they've got to go down there, try and find out what the aliens are, where they are, because nobody's seen them,
nobody knows anything about them, it's all being done by proxy.
They've got to find out as much of the plot as possible at the same time, by enough time, to prepare by hopefully knocking off the four lords of the diamond.
Fascinating.
So you have four different worlds, four exotic adventure-type worlds, each one of which is quite different,
and the criminal leaders are all different as well.
Some of them you might like better than the people who are leading human civilization, and some of them you won't.
And the entire thing is throughout it all, you're trying to find out exactly why the aliens are there, what they're doing, who they are, everything about them.
And there are just enough clues sprinkled along that maybe, hopefully not, somebody will be able to figure it out.
I haven't done the last one yet.
I might tell you that my editor doesn't know how it ends, my wife doesn't know how it ends, nobody with me knows how it ends, nobody with me knows pollution as well.
And because the four books are happening simultaneously in four different places, what I'm doing is, I can't have any foreknowledge.
I've got to put some distance between each book, so I'm writing something else between each of the four books.
Right now I'm in the middle of a very different kind of novel, and a fantasy novel as a matter of fact.
And when I finish that, then I'll do the last of the four books.
I was fascinated with the first two. It's one of the few series that I am anxiously awaiting the outcome of it.
Listen, we are at the end of a tape. Can we just change the tape quickly and ask you some more?